everyone who is watching this video is
in for one heck of a treat before we get
started with the video if you don't know
who I am my name is Cole I'm a 22 year
old farmer from central Iowa I farm with
my dad and my younger brother and I have
something I would kind of like to talk
about I'm wearing my pit viper
sunglasses because the Sun is super
bright and I'd be doing this the whole
time and no one wants to see me with my
eyes shut so we got the pit vipers on by
the way if you want to pick up a pair
check out the link in the description if
you use the code Kohl the corn star
you'll get 10% off I think a lot of
people really misunderstand what
actually goes on with the farms
financials
I mean farmers are driving around with
$500,000 combines and $300,000 tractors
they have to be making tons of money
right well that's not always the case
this video I'm going to get very
personal I'm going to actually go in
behind the scenes on our own 1,700 acre
operation and I'm going to break down
all of our income and all of our
expenses and I'm hoping I can shine a
little light on to what goes on here on
the farm I would say we're pretty much
the average farm and I'm not here to say
our business is perfectly efficient and
I'm percent correct in every way we
definitely have a lot of room to improve
no one's perfect and we are trying our
best like I said just a little bit ago
this video is very personal and that's
because I'm going to be using our farms
actual numbers mostly I have a couple
rules now the first rule is I'm not
going to be using our farms actual
income and our actual rent expenses I'm
going to be using averages from the Iowa
State University Extension website they
put together some really good stuff
there so I'm going to be based off that
for the state of Iowa I really don't
care if anyone knows how much money I
have or how much money I make but I do
not want to put our farm at a
competitive disadvantage compared to all
our neighbors I don't really want them
knowing all of our information so that's
why we're doing that and the second
thing is I'm going to be rounding all
the numbers to the nearest thousand
because no one wants to hear me say
$149,000 and 99 cents for every single
item that we're adding together it makes
a lot of unnecessary chitchat the third
thing
because our firm is paying for it
doesn't mean other farms are paying for
it remember not every farm is cookie
cutter and lastly this video is intended
to just show the shell of how the
financials behind a farm work it's not
designed to be a pity video at all in
other words what I'm saying is please
don't feel sorry for me or any other
farmer for that matter I know what goes
on on our farm is 100% our
responsibility and what applies on our
farm isn't going to apply on another
farm farming in central Iowa is a lot
different than farming in western
Montana oh yeah I forgot about one last
thing I'm going to be going based off
the 2018 Cup because I have all the
numbers for 2018 all the 2019 numbers
are not out yet oh yeah one last one
last thing I'm going to miss something
and I don't always do everything 100%
correctly nobody does this is a
real-life farm in the real life world so
I'm just putting it out there how we do
it so if I do miss something please feel
free to write it down in the comments
it's by the way if you enjoyed this
video and learn something from me could
you please give it a thumbs up this
video it took me a lot of time to make
thank you
so farmers get paid when they sell their
product so in our case when we sell our
corn and soybeans we also get paid when
the government pays us that's right I
said government government now I know a
lot of people get uneasy about that and
trust me we do - we don't like just
receiving a check for doing nothing but
if we don't take that money it puts us
at a severe competitive disadvantage if
everyone else is taking that money and
to be completely honest government
payments are really helping a lot of
farmers right now because there would be
a lot of guys who wouldn't be in
business without it and as far as I'm
concerned I think everyone watching this
video likes to eat so the average corn
yield in Iowa for 2018 was a hundred
ninety six bushels an acre which isn't
too bad in soybeans yielded 57 bushels
an acre so on our farm we raised 1200
acres of corn for a total yield of 235
thousand 200 bushels of corn and then we
planted 500 acres of soybeans for a
total yield of twenty eight thousand
five hundred bushels well that seemed
pretty easy right well now we have to
sell it so when it comes to selling it
we go based off the Chicago Board of
Trade that's the market that shows the
current price of corn and soybeans now
keep in mind the price that we see on
the Chicago Board of Trade is not what
we actually get in our pocket when we
sell the grain there's a thing called
basis so let's say the Chicago Board of
Trade says corn is four dollars a bushel
but there's a lot of local buyers around
that don't really need a lot of corn
right now so they're only offering three
dollars a bushel that dollar a bushel
difference is the basis so in places are
really needing grain they're gonna have
a smaller basis I've even seen places
have a positive basis meaning they're
paying higher than the Board of Trade
but when places don't need grain they
have a low basis a normal basis is
usually around 30 to 70 cents under the
board of trade so when the basis is
taken out that makes a cash sale now
since some farmers are great marketers
some are average marketers and most are
terrible marketers I just found the high
cash price for 2018 the average and the
low and then I took all of our bushels
divided by 3 so 1/3 so love the high
third sold at the average third sold at
the low
this might not be the most perfect way
to do it but that's how we're doing it
for the simplicity sake of the video so
a third of our two hundred thirty five
thousand two hundred bushels of corn is
seventy eight thousand four hundred
bushels
according to Iowa State's site the
highest cash price for corn last year
was $3.57 the average was three dollars
and forty-one cents and the low was
three dollars and twenty four cents so
all those corn bushels sold for eight
hundred and one thousand dollars of
course we can't forget about soybeans so
ever twenty-eight thousand five hundred
bushels of soybeans dividing that into
thirds brings it into nine thousand five
hundred bushel segments now once again
according to Iowa State's website the
high soybean cash price was nine dollars
and seventy five cents the average was
nine dollars and five cents and the low
was eight dollars and thirty eight cents
so here on the farm we sold all of our
soybeans for $259,000 so when we had our
corn sales and our soybean sales that
gives us an income of 1 million sixty
thousand dollars oh but wait
remember those government government
payments I was talking about earlier
this is where they come into play so in
2018 the United States government
government came out with the market
facilitation program
aka MFP payments so the MFP payments
paid a penny per bushel of corn raised
in 2018 in a dollar sixty five per
bushel of soybeans raised in 2018 so on
our farm the MFP program paid us two
thousand dollars for corn in 47 thousand
dollars for soybeans so when we add our
MFP payment to the rest of our sales
that brings us to a total income of 1
million one hundred nine thousand
dollars now there is something I want
people to keep in mind when we sell our
grain to a buyer the price we get is for
corn that is a hundred percent perfect
condition say there's a little damage to
the corner there's a little smell or if
bugs somehow got in there all those
things can have a doc so a normal doc is
usually five to fifteen cents a bushel
but if something's really bad say a hot
spot gets in the middle of a bin which
can easily happen that doc can be up to
40 cents a bushel
now in the case of our farm we can store
almost all of our crop and our own grain
bins in our own buildings but there is
some grain that we weren't able to store
in our own storage because we simply
didn't have the room so we had to bring
that grain to the coop now our local
co-op is a place that has millions of
bushels worth of corn and soybean
storage and so what they do is when we
bring our corn in there they store the
grain for us to store grain at our local
co-op it costs fifteen cents a bushel
for the first 90 days no matter what so
if we decided to sell our grain after
being in there for 30 days it still
costs us 15 cents a bushel to store it
and then every month that's additional
after 90 days is 3 cents a bushel so if
we decided to store our grain there for
an entire year it would cost us 42 cents
a bushel just to have it sitting in
storage so what the hope is by being
able to store the grain a farmer will be
able to capture a higher price in the
future than what it is right now so when
a farmer has storage on their own farm
while it's not completely free
oftentimes it is significantly cheaper
than taking it to a co-op
so now that we've made our 1.1 million
dollars what do we do with it this is
where my expertise comes in my expertise
in spending money because farmers have a
lot of expenses so just to give you guys
a little feel for what kind of expenses
we're going through here let's just name
them real quick we got equipment phones
right professional fees bank loans do
old crop insurance property insurance
employees charging expense repairs see
burn supplies food utilities you know we
can't forget about the miscellaneous
expenses the very first expense that I
want to talk about is equipment putting
together equipment expense for a farm is
really difficult because every farm is
so different some farms run equipment
that's 50 years old some farmers run
equipment that's brand spanking new some
farmers own some old some new some lease
and some don't
now I would give you our equipment
financial situation but since we got a
lot of neighbors watching I really don't
want to give that stuff out so I put
together an equipment list for a farm
our size on some stuff that's a little
newer some stuff that's a little older
everything we would need for a farm our
size do you want to see the individual
items here on the screen pause it and
you can see what I have listed for
everything but with this equipment here
I figured it'd cost about $900,000 to
purchase it all and let's just assume
for the simplicity sake of this video
that half of its paid off so $450,000
stretched over a five-year equipment
plan that comes out to $50 an acre take
something like this tractor for example
if someone were to buy this particular
one brand-new it would run over three
hundred thousand dollars the sprayer
behind me try finding one of those for
under $200,000 used and take the combine
behind me one of these in the
ten-year-old machine probably looking at
$100,000 so right there and just these
three pieces of equipment a hundred
thousand dollars three hundred thousand
two hundred thousand six hundred grand
wrapped up in three pieces of equipment
now these are all just examples of
course what I'm saying is equipment is
really expensive when it comes to
equipment older stuff is a lot cheaper
newer stuff is more expensive but older
stuff has more downtime more repairs
newer stuff more uptime less repairs a
lot more efficient faster bigger in a
heck of a lot nicer to riding but also a
lot more expensive on any farm input
are gonna be one of the most expensive
things so the first major input that
we're gonna have is seed last year we
planted 1200 acres of corn and that cost
us 135 thousand dollars in just corn
seed and for the 500 acres of soybeans
we had that cost us twenty four thousand
dollars so as a whole it cost us a
hundred and fifty nine thousand dollars
just for the seed to plant now that
we've bought some really expensive seed
we want to make sure that we can get the
most yield out of that seat as possible
that's where the machine behind me comes
in this is the sprayer so we use the
sprayer to spray down chemicals to keep
weeds out of our fields because weeds
Rob nutrients from the seeds that we're
trying to plant and it causes them to
produce a lower yield during the
springtime I basically live in this
thing because I have to spray all of our
corn ground and bean ground before we
plant and then after we plant I come in
and I spray it again to keep out the
weeds and then we keep an eye on stuff
to make sure stuff doesn't come back
because if it does that I have to hit
all the ground again on weed killer for
corn we spent 48 thousand dollars last
year and weed killer for beans we spent
$28,000 that is where organic farming
would be really nice because then we
wouldn't have to spray down any
chemicals and we would be able to
eliminate that cost but please keep in
mind for organic farming we'd have to go
chemical free for three years but during
that three-year transition phase we
would not be able to get the organic
premium because our ground wouldn't be
organic certified yet and also other
things to keep in mind when it comes to
organic farming is that it requires a
lot more time there's a lot more wear
and tear on tractors and a lot more
diesel fuel is gonna be expended in
order to keep weeds out of the crop and
generally speaking in a well organized
organic field yields are gonna be about
half of what we produce and if weed
outbreaks are especially bad it could be
even worse than that I don't want anyone
to think that I'm anti organic because
I'm not I think it's absolutely awesome
just at this point in time it doesn't
make sense for our farm also since we
own our own sprayer we don't have to pay
anyone to applicate for us our local
applicators charge six dollars an acre
to spray and we'd have to go over all of
our acres at least twice so at 1,700
acres hit twice that's 3,400 acres at
six dollars an acre that's what it would
cost just to run the machine over those
acres but since we own this one we don't
have to pay that so one of the reasons
why we own it in this
to our last major input and that's
fertilizer think of fertilizer as
nutrients and vitamins for a plant to
grow big strong and healthy in yield a
lot of corn there's two different types
of fertilizer we put on dry fertilizer
and liquid fertilizer dry fertilizer is
put on in the fall after we're done
harvesting and is put on with a spreader
the spreader is a machine kind of like
those things people use to seed their
yards width of grass where they push and
it spins and it kicks seed out that's
basically a small version of what a
spreader is so when the spreader is
brought to the field they're putting on
phosphorous and potassium in farmer
speak we call this P and K and then
they're also putting on pail lime which
is short for pala ties lime and what
that lime is gonna do is balance the pH
in the soil and then it's gonna
basically unlock nutrients in the soil
for the plant to be able to use and then
we put another product in there that
makes the P and K more readily available
for the plant so for the spreader to go
back and forth in our fields it cost six
dollars an acre P and K runs at 56
dollars an acre Pelle lime is 15 dollars
an acre and then the product we use to
make the P and K more readily available
that costs five dollars an acre so for
us to play dry fertilizer on it costs
eighty two dollars an acre and the good
news here is we all have to put it on
our corn acres so for us to put dry
fertilizer on 1200 acres it's gonna cost
us ninety eight thousand dollars chump
change so then when it comes to liquid
fertilizer farmers do this different all
across the board there's different ways
of putting on liquid fertilizer but the
way we do it is with 32 percent nitrogen
and that's basically giving the corn
steroids so there's two types of ground
we plant on corn that was corn the year
before
aka corn on corn and then corn that was
beamed the year before
aka corn on beans since corn Rob's more
nitrogen from the soil than beans we
need to supplement more nitrogen back
into corn on corn soil than corn on bean
soil so corn on corn soil takes more
nitrogen so for us to put our corn on
corn 32% it costs us six to eight
thousand dollars and for us to put our
corn on bean nitrogen it costs us twenty
two thousand dollars we also add a zinc
additive into all that 32 percent and
that cost an extra each
thousand dollars oh yeah remember the
sprayer most farmers don't own their own
sprayer and they hire a co-op to do it
for them so for the coop to come in and
spray the first rate of liquid nitrogen
down it would cost six dollars an acre
and then for the second rate of nitrogen
when the corns yay high it would cost
twelve dollars and fifty cents an acre
fortunately for us since we own our
sprayer we don't have to pay that one of
the biggest expenses on our farms is
cash rent
according to Iowa State University's
extension site they say the average rent
in Iowa is $222 nacre remember two
hundred and twenty-two dollars an acre
is an average some people pay more some
people pay less if ground is better
people are willing to pay more if ground
is worse people are willing to pay less
I've heard of rents being as low as $100
an acre in as high as $500 an acre there
are farmers who own a hundred percent of
their a KERS there's farmers who've rent
a hundred percent of their acres and
there's farmers who rent some and own
some so in the case of us we own 1,100
acres and we rent 600 acres so what we
do on corn star farms is we try to keep
our land payments equivalent to what our
cash rent average is so when we have
some farms that we owe a lot of money on
then we have some farms that we owe a
little bit of money on we try to get
that to average together to equal our
cash rent average so in this case it's
222 dollars an acre so for 1,700 acres
at 222 dollars nacre that costs us three
hundred and seventy seven thousand
dollars coal if land is so expensive to
rent why don't you just go to a landlord
and have them lower the price of rent
that's a really good idea but it's not
that easy the best thing I can compare
it to is try going to a landlord on a
house and saying hey lower the rent for
me good luck there are some landlords
who are really good to work with and
will work with the farmer on their rents
and understand when prices are low
they're not gonna pay as much for rent
and when prices are high they're gonna
be able to pay a little more since we
own 1,100 acres we get a delightful
thing called property taxes so for
property taxes we pay $32 over 1,100
acres for a total cost of 35 thousand
dollars a year in property taxes that's
expensive not only is that bad enough
but since we're buying 1,100 acres at
222 dollars an acre on a 25-year
mortgage
that means we have to pay taxes on it
1100 acres at 222 dollars an acre is two
hundred and forty four thousand dollars
so basically dad shows an income of two
so for lack of simpler terms here dad
pays taxes on two hundred forty four
thousand dollars dad is able to deduct
interest as a tax deduction but it's
really not that significant in the grand
scheme of things so after doing a quick
and dirty tax analysis on this dad is
paying sixty thousand dollars a year in
income tax after buying this ground now
I know people are gonna argue that whoa
coal that's going into equity which is
going towards your dad's net worth so
you're ultimately making money at the
end of the day and I mean yeah you're
right but at the same time net worth
doesn't really mean a whole lot to a
farmer because we're never planning on
selling any of this stuff so it's money
that goes into something and yes on
paper it is adding to our net worth but
it's kind of like having a three million
dollar Bugatti that you're not allowed
to sell and it honestly really takes a
farmer to understand that net worth
really doesn't mean anything I know this
might get a lot of people fired up but
at the end of the day we're never
looking at our net worth because net
worth doesn't pay the bills and we're
never planning on selling it anyway so
it doesn't really matter what it's worth
we're just looking at a cash flow I
could talk about the advantages of
owning versus renting and vice versa but
that's a whole nother topic for a whole
nother video am I the only one speaking
when I say I love paying the license and
registration fees on all of our vehicles
especially when you have four semis five
trailers and ten vehicles yeah it adds
up we spent six thousand dollars a year
on license and registration fees I don't
know if a lot of people know this or not
but farmers don't just have that million
dollars we sold them grain sitting
around in the bank account all year and
then we subtract out of it as expenses
come we sell throughout the year as it
goes so that means there's a lot of
times during the year where we don't
have money to buy things it's when the
three hundred seventy seven thousand
dollar rent payment comes around and we
only have twenty dollars sitting in the
bank account that means we have to
borrow it
we call that an operating note so the
interest we pay an operating note
throughout the year is just about thirty
six thousand dollars I know that
interest can be used as a tax write-off
too but I'm not gonna get into any of
that
I'm not a CPA and I'm not a tax expert
so I'm just not gonna go there but keep
in mind there is a tax aspect to some of
this stuff too so in our firm we have
seven tractors combine a sprayer ten
vehicles a backhoe two skid loaders what
else am I forgetting and a lawnmower can
guess what they have one thing in common
they all use fuel so in our farm in 2018
we spent 41 thousand dollars on fuel so
the next time someone goes to the gas
station and sees their fuel bill over a
hundred dollars just think someone's got
it worse a lot worse and yes there are
tractors and trucks that are a lot more
fuel efficient but keep in mind that's
another expense when it comes to buying
equipment not only is fuel really
expensive for us insurance is cool
insurance is expensive so on the farm we
have cop insurance and then we have
property insurance now believe me when I
say insurance isn't something we have to
try to make a lot of money off of
between crop insurance and property
insurance we spend $40,000 a year
see this yep a cell phone basically
couldn't farm without it so our phones
tied with internet cost us five thousand
dollars a year for 2018 we paid $16,000
in total labor so on the farm from time
to time we have projects that we are not
capable of doing ourselves because
either we don't have the time to do it
or we don't have the equipment to do it
we call this category custom work so say
that someone comes and helps us plant
corn someone helps us harvest some beans
someone brings out their bulldozers
you're an excavator to tear down some
trees and fix some waterways for us all
of this stuff applies last year we spent
twelve thousand dollars and custom work
you guys want to know my absolute
favorite thing about going to the lawyer
in the accountant that's right you
guessed it paying for it we spent three
thousand dollars last year in
professional fees see this building see
all these tools see all these parts we
don't just have all this stuff for show
we use it so that way we can fix our
equipment when it comes to equipment the
more we use something the more it's
gonna break and the older something is
the more likely it's gonna break well
not always with the old stuff because
some of the old stuff is made the best
and it lasts a lot longer than the new
stuff but you get what I'm saying on our
farm we run a wide variety of equipment
some of its newer some of its older and
we try to do as many of our own repairs
as we possibly can
hence why we built this shop because if
we have to take some
think to a shop to have it worked on
most places charge $120 an hour and when
it comes to semis there are semi places
that charge almost $200 an hour last
year was a pretty expensive year for us
when it came to repairs we just had a
lot of stuff go wrong and sometimes that
just happens so we spent 75 thousand
dollars on repairs in 2018 well Cole if
you have newer equipment your repair
bill would be a lot lower and that may
be true but new equipment is also really
expensive and often times repairs are
cheaper than buying something new and
new equipment still does break we try to
run equipment as long as we can and once
it starts giving us more fits than what
it's worth then that's when we upgrade
to something newer now on the farm
during the busy season staying up and
running is the name of the game so we
carry a lot of parts and supplies in
2018 we spent $5,000 on supplies this
brings us to one of our bigger expenses
and that is trucking on corn star farms
we have four semis yet we hire out all
of our grain to be hauled away why do we
do that in the first reason is none of
our semis are in the shape that I would
want to take them on a hundred thirty
mile round-trip multiple times a day all
throughout the year because well they're
old then they would be quite a bit of
money put into them in order to get them
d-o-t inspection worthy I mean I guess
we could buy new trucks but you guys
just saw how expensive semis are and
even if we did buy newer trucks there's
also a thing called time so the place we
haul to is sixty-five miles away it's
130 mile round-trip and some days
there's a three to four hour line we'd
be hauling grain all the time and we
wouldn't have time to do anything else
on the farm and we have more to do than
just all grain which that brings up the
argument of well what do you haul so far
away the particular place we're bringing
it to often has a 30 cent premium over
our local co-op meaning we can hire a
trucker not using our own trucks not
using your own time giving someone else
a job pay them 22 cents a bushel to haul
down there for us and then we get paid
30 cents a bushel more than our local
co-op so even after paying the trucker
22 cents a bushel we are still profiting
8 cents a bushel over bringing it to our
local co-op in other words what I'm
saying is it costs us more money to
bring
- our local co-op so it's a win-win
situation all the way around for us to
bring it to the place further away oh
yeah I almost forgot to mention we spent
eighty five thousand dollars on trucking
last year you guys see that right there
that's a light that light requires
electricity you guys see this hand you
see how beautiful the skin is on my hand
that's because I had water to drink
electricity water yeah that's our
utilities we spend $10,000 on utilities
last year keep in mind that is for for
farmyards two houses two shops
grain dryer three bin fans yeah you get
the point now before we talk about
everything that's happened in this video
there are two expenses that are a little
bit different on our farm than in most
farm and part of that is because of our
location and the second part is just our
farm management decisions that we make
here on corn star farms so the first
thing that a lot of people do is tillage
we run no-till here on our farm so
therefore we don't run any tillage
tillage can run anywhere from ten to
twenty dollars an acre depending on what
you're pulling out in the field and what
kind of tractor you're using there's a
lot of variability different soil types
ground moisture whatever but for the
simplicity sake we'll just say it cost
fifteen dollars an acre to run tillage
since we don't have to do any of that
we're able to save a lot of expense
there and the second thing is due to us
being located in central Iowa oftentimes
we have really nice weather in the fall
and that allows our corn to dry down
meaning we don't have to dry our corn as
much and sometimes we don't have to dry
our corn at all
so in 2018 we didn't have to dry a
single bushel of corn but there are a
lot of farmers who have to dry every
single bushel corn they have and drying
can get really expensive if someone has
to take corn to the coop to be dried our
local co-op charges four cents a point
so if corn is twenty five percent
moisture and it has to be brought down
to fifteen percent moisture they have to
direct ten points that costs 40 cents a
bushel and add insult to injury when
corn is wetter is bigger and when they
dry it down it shrinks so then they have
a strength factor added to that but I'm
not an expert when it comes to shrink so
I'm going to be conservative and just
not include that well say the cobs are
being nice and just waves the shrink fee
and then there's some farmers like us
who have on site drying and we're able
to dry our corn for four and a half
cents a bushel so it's significantly
cheaper for us to own our own dryer and
dry our own corn than to take it to the
coop but keep in mind you have to have
Ben's fort which are the expensive gift
of and dryer which is really expensive
you have to have all the electricity
hookup the lp hookup and all that
and expense so there's pros and cons to
both sides but in 2018 we were lucky
enough to not have to try any bushels so
we saved a lot of money there - yes
this number is real all right cool all
jokes aside now there's no way a farm is
losing two hundred and thirty nine
thousand dollars and is still in
business well guys like I said these
were actual numbers of what we spent
here on our farm this year so this
number is real now just imagine someone
who harvested a crop that was 20 bushels
less than the numbers were going off of
really bad day for them so I know
everyone's wondering the house of farm
able to continue going on if this is the
reality for it and frankly there's a lot
of firms that aren't and this loss of
money trend isn't anything new it's been
going on for the past six years and
really there's only about four things
that have been keeping people off low
the first one is having good financers
having a financier that is able to work
with the grower that is able to
refinance things out longer to make
payments lower to help a farmer scoop by
those kind of deals have been really
helping a lot of farmers scoot along in
the second one being is most farmers
have more than one source of income
meaning they're working more than one
job I know in the case of our farm we
have a few investments that cash flow we
have our grave-digging business I have
my youtube channel my brother has his
hay baling business and then mama corn
star works full-time so everyone
watching really needs to give mama corn
star a high five a hug and a thank you
because without her job the farm
wouldn't be here there were a few years
where we were so tight financially that
it was mom's income that kept the farm
afloat so thank you mom the third thing
that's keeping farmers afloat is
government payments this two hundred and
thirty nine thousand dollar loss is with
the $49,000 government payment take that
government payment out we're getting
close to three hundred thousand
ouch and the fourth thing is praying as
a farmer we have to have faith in God
because without him we wouldn't have any
of it in the first place
in our relationship with Jesus Christ is
the only thing that we really have in
this world and the only thing that we're
gonna be able to carry with us therefore
is the most important thing and I know
our farmer praying is something I do
every day
I know from the outside looking in at
all of our expenses and stuff it just
looks
our business is all over the place is
terribly inefficient we're not effective
I mean how can a business lose 239
thousand dollars a year and you would be
a hundred percent correct by saying a
lot of that is our fault because it is
but there also are factors that are
beyond our hands seems like the weather
and the markets are things that we
simply can't control and yes we can
always become better marketers but the
weather
mother nature kind of does what she
wants so when it comes to the farm as a
whole there are a lot of things we can
improve on one of the biggest things we
can do is raise a better crop we need to
be learning more about the science that
goes in behind raising a crop and how we
as growers can raise a better crop
something as simple as applying
fertilizers that are more effective or
maybe utilizing fungicide to keep a
healthier plant or something as easy as
doing soil samples or tissue samples to
figure out what our soil is lacking or
what our plants are lacking for
nutrients so what we can do with all
that stuff is take that information
analyze it and then we can figure out
what we need to be doing better for the
next year in order to raise better crop
and like I said just a little bit ago
mother nature is the biggest factor but
we can have all of our other ducks in
line so when mother nature's in line
we'll have everything else ready to go
the second thing we can really improve
on on our farm here is marketing so two
years ago we hired a third-party
marketing firm and we have been so happy
ever since we did that we hire
professionals for everything else in our
lives right we hire a lawyer we hire an
accountant why not hire someone who's a
professional marketer before we went
through a marketing firm we did
everything on cash sales and our sales
were so strong out and we would have
carryover corn from the year before and
then we wouldn't have enough room to
store our corn at home and so we'd be
sending a bunch of the coop which is
really expensive as we just saw before
and we were just flat-out bad at
marketing so once we decided to take a
step forward and use a marketing service
we started utilizing hedging hedging has
been the difference maker for our farm
these past two years if you don't know
anything about hedging and you're a
farmer please go learn about it if you
don't want to learn about it go find
someone who knows about it because it is
the biggest marketing tool that we have
used on our farm hands down honestly
probably ever fun fact you can make
money off the market when it's going
down
by utilizing hedging I'm telling you
what can do it and then lastly the third
thing we can do is simply tighten up our
belts maybe I can keep daddy corn star
away from a few more auctions so he
doesn't have to do impulse auger buys
all the time or maybe I can keep Cooper
out of the parts store so he's not
buying so many tools all the time those
five hundred dollar purchases just
really add up over time and they make a
big difference as time goes on just for
the fun of it I crunched some numbers
just to see what kind of prices what
kind of yield we would need in order to
break even and before I get started in
that I just want to brush on something
real quick farmers don't do what they do
for the money frankly in farming most
years there's not any money in it at all
yes every now and again there are a few
years that are really prosperous for
farmers I mean look at a lot of things
in our operation we wouldn't have been
able to afford them had we not had years
that were prosperous but with that being
said keep in mind my grandfather farmed
for sixty years and then when my dad was
10 years old he started farming so he's
been farming for 45 years so between my
dad and grandpa that's a hundred and
five years of blood sweat and tears that
have been put into the farm and they
worked 100% together their entire life
so everything we have on the farm today
is because of them I can't take credit
for anything that's gone on because
that's all been on them I'm just taking
the farm from where it's at now and I'm
figuring out all the ways we can improve
it and make it better from there all
right let's get back to a number
crunching here what do we got to do to
get out of the red well basically we
have two options we can get a higher
yield or we can raise the price so first
let's try raising the yield and keep our
same average prices since we plant 70%
corn and 30% beans that's how I made up
the ratios on how much is needed from
each crop so if we're gonna keep an
average price of $3 and 41 cents for
corn we need to raise $168,000 in order
to reach break-even so in order to do
that we'd have to increase our
production 41 bushels an acre giving us
a total yield of 237 bushels an acre in
for soybeans we need to raise 8,000 more
bushels or a 16 bushel an acre increase
now I bring our total soybean yield with
73 bushels an acre and when it comes to
keeping the same yield but raising the
price for corn we would need to raise
the price 71 and a half
or have 4.13 sick corn in for soy beans
we would need to raise the price $2.49
or have $11 fifty five cent beans those
prices are very possible corn and
soybeans can fluctuate a ton and they
can do it very quickly
and in 2019 we have seen some of that in
corn but soybeans have a ways to go now
I hope everyone who's watched this video
now kind understands the shell of how
the financials behind a farm work
remember every farm is different well
there you have it that's what we do if
you liked the video please give it a
thumbs up and if you have any questions
need clarification on something or just
have any suggestions in general please
write it down in the comments and if you
guys like the style of video please let
me know this is a lot different than
what I normally do but I enjoy making
these so let me know and then lastly if
you want to stay tuned for the journey
of our farm please hit the subscribe
button that way you'll be notified when
I post and then you'll be able to tune
right in and keep up with our journey
thanks for watching everybody
Oh
[Music]